                                                Learning to Walk in Minutes Using Massively
                                                   Parallel Deep Reinforcement Learning
                                                   Nikita Rudin                    David Hoeller                    Philipp Reist
                                              ETH Zurich and NVIDIA            ETH Zurich and NVIDIA                  NVIDIA
                                                rudinn@ethz.ch                   dhoeller@ethz.ch                preist@nvidia.com

                                                                                  Marco Hutter
                                                                                   ETH Zurich




arXiv:2109.11978v3 [cs.RO] 19 Aug 2022
                                                                               mahutter@ethz.com



                                                 Abstract: In this work, we present and study a training set-up that achieves fast
                                                 policy generation for real-world robotic tasks by using massive parallelism on a
                                                 single workstation GPU. We analyze and discuss the impact of different training
                                                 algorithm components in the massively parallel regime on the final policy perfor-
                                                 mance and training times. In addition, we present a novel game-inspired curricu-
                                                 lum that is well suited for training with thousands of simulated robots in parallel.
                                                 We evaluate the approach by training the quadrupedal robot ANYmal to walk on
                                                 challenging terrain. The parallel approach allows training policies for flat terrain
                                                 in under four minutes, and in twenty minutes for uneven terrain. This represents
                                                 a speedup of multiple orders of magnitude compared to previous work. Finally,
                                                 we transfer the policies to the real robot to validate the approach. We open-source
                                                 our training code to help accelerate further research in the field of learned legged
                                                 locomotion: https://leggedrobotics.github.io/legged_gym/.

                                                 Keywords: Reinforcement Learning, Legged Robots, Sim-to-real




                                                           Figure 1: Thousands of robots learning to walk in simulation.

                                         1   Introduction
                                         Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) is proving to be a powerful tool for robotics. Tasks such as
                                         legged locomotion [1], manipulation [2], and navigation [3], have been solved using these new
                                         tools, and research continues to keep adding more and more challenging tasks to the list. The
                                         amount of data required to train a policy increases with the task complexity. For this reason, most
                                         work focuses on training in simulation before transferring to real robots. We have reached a point
                                         where multiple days or even weeks are needed to fully train an agent with current simulators. For
                                         example, OpenAI’s block reorientation task was trained for up to 14 days and their Rubik’s cube
                                         solving policy took several months to train [4]. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that deep
reinforcement learning requires hyper-parameter tuning to obtain a suitable solution which requires
sequentially rerunning time-consuming training. Reducing training times using massively parallel
approaches such as presented here can therefore help improve the quality and time-to-deployment
of DRL policies, as a training setup can be iterated on more often in the same time frame.
In this paper, we examine the effects of massive parallelism for on-policy DRL algorithms and
present considerations in how the standard RL formulation and the most commonly used hyper-
parameters should be adapted to learn efficiently in the highly parallel regime. Additionally, we
present a novel game-inspired curriculum which automatically adapts the task difficulty to the per-
formance of the policy. The proposed curriculum architecture is straightforward to implement, does
not require tuning, and is well suited for the massively parallel regime. Common robotic simulators
such as Mujoco [5], Bullet [6], or Raisim [7] feature efficient multi-body dynamics implementations.
However, they have been developed to run on CPUs with only a reduced amount of parallelism. In
this work, we use NVIDIA’s Isaac Gym simulation environment [8], which runs both the simulation
and training on the GPU and is capable of simulating thousands of robots in parallel.
The massively parallel training regime has been explored before [4, 9] in the context of distributed
systems with a network of thousands of CPUs each running a separate instance of the simulation.
The parallelization was achieved by averaging the gradients between the different workers without
reducing the number of samples provided by each agent. This results in large batch sizes of millions
of samples for each policy update which improves the learning dynamics, but does not optimize
the overall training time. In parallel, recent works have aimed to increase the simulation through-
put and reduce training times of standard DRL benchmark tasks. A framework combining parallel
simulation with multi-GPU training [10] was proposed to achieve fast training using hundreds of
parallel agents. In the context of visual navigation, large batch simulation has been used to increase
the training throughput [11]. Furthermore, GPU accelerated physics simulation has been shown to
significantly improve the training time of the Humanoid running task [12]. A differentiable simu-
lator running on Google’s TPUs has also been shown to greatly accelerate the training of multiple
tasks [13]. We build upon [10, 12] by pushing the parallelization further, optimizing the training
algorithm, and applying the approach to a challenging real-world robotics task.
Perceptive and dynamic locomotion for legged robots in unstructured environments is a demanding
task that, until recently, had only been partially demonstrated with complex model-based approaches
[14, 15]. Learning-based approaches are emerging as a promising alternative. For quadrupeds, DRL
has been used to train blind policies robust to highly uneven ground [16] (12 hours of training). Per-
ceptive locomotion over challenging terrain has been achieved by combining learning with optimal
control techniques [17, 18] (82 and 88 hours of training) and recently, a fully learned approach has
shown great robustness in this setting [19] (120 hours of training). Similarly, bipedal robots have
also been trained to walk blindly on stairs [20] (training time not reported). With our approach we
can train a perceptive policy in under 20 minutes on a single GPU, with the complexity of sim-
to-real transfer to the hardware, which increases the performance and robustness requirements and
provides clear validation of the overall approach. Training such behaviors in minutes opens up new
exciting possibilities ranging from automatic tuning to customized training using scans of particular
environments.


2   Massively Parallel Reinforcement Learning

Current (on-policy) reinforcement learning algorithms are divided into two parts: data collection and
policy update. The policy update, which corresponds to back-propagation for neural networks, is
easily performed in parallel on the GPU. Parallelizing data collection is not as straightforward. Each
step consists of policy inference, simulation, reward, and observation calculation. Current popular
pipelines have the simulation and reward/observation calculation computed on the CPU, making the
GPU unsuitable for policy inference because of communication bottle-necks. Data transfer over
PCIe is known to be the weakest link of GPU acceleration, and can be as much as 50 times slower
than the GPU processing time alone [21]. Furthermore, with CPU data collection, a large amount
of data must be sent to the GPU for each policy update, slowing down the overall process. Limited
parallelization can be achieved by using multiple CPU cores and spawning many processes, each
running the simulation for one agent. However, the number of agents is quickly limited by the num-
ber of cores and other issues such as memory usage. We explore the potential of massive parallelism


                                                  2
with Isaac Gym’s end-to-end data collection and policy updates on the GPU, significantly reducing
data copying and improving simulation throughput.

2.1     Simulation Throughput

The main factor affecting the total simulation throughput is the number of robots simulated in par-
allel. Modern GPUs can handle tens of thousands of parallel instructions. Similarly, IsaacGym’s
PhysX engine can process thousands of robots in a single simulation and all other computations of
our pipeline are vectorized to scale favorably with the number of robots. Using a single simulation
with thousands of robots presents some new challenges. For example, a single common terrain mesh
must be used, and it cannot be easily changed at each reset. We circumvent this problem by creating
the whole mesh with all terrain types and levels tiled side by side. We change the terrain level of
the robots by physically moving them on the mesh. In supplementary material, we show the com-
putational time of different parts of the pipeline, examine how these times scale with the number of
robots, and provide other techniques to optimize the simulation throughput.

2.2     DRL Algorithm

We build upon a custom implementation of the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) algorithm [22].
Our implementation is designed to perform every operation and store all the data on the GPU. In or-
der to efficiently learn from thousands of robots in parallel, we perform some essential modifications
to the algorithm and change some of the commonly used hyper-parameter values.

2.2.1    Hyper-Parameters Modification
In an on-policy algorithm such as PPO, a fixed policy collects a selected amount of data before do-
ing the next policy update. This batch size, B, is a crucial hyper-parameter for successful learning.
With too little data, the gradients will be too noisy, and the algorithm will not learn effectively. With
too much data, the samples become repetitive, and the algorithm cannot extract more information
from them. These samples represent wasted simulation time and slow down the overall training. We
have B = nrobots nsteps , where nsteps is the number of steps each robot takes per policy update
and nrobots the number of robots simulated in parallel. Since we increase nrobots by a few orders
of magnitude, we must choose a small nsteps to keep B reasonable and hence optimize training
times, which is a setting that has not been extensively explored for on-policy reinforcement learning
algorithms. It turns out that we can not choose nsteps to be arbitrarily low. The algorithm requires
trajectories with coherent temporal information to learn effectively. Even though, in theory, informa-
tion of single steps could be used, we find that the algorithm fails to converge to the optimal solution
below a certain threshold. This can be explained by the fact that we use Generalized Advantage
Estimation (GAE) [23], which requires rewards from multiple time steps to be effective. For our
task, we find that the algorithm struggles when we provide fewer than 25 consecutive steps, corre-
sponding to 0.5 s of simulated time. It is important to distinguish nsteps from the maximum episode
length leading to a time-out and a reset, which we define as 20 s. The environments are reset when
they reach this maximum length and not after each iteration, meaning that a single episode can cover
many policy updates. This limits the total number of robots training in parallel, and consequently,
prohibits us from using the full computational capabilities of the GPU.
The mini-batch size represents the size of the chunks in which the batch size is split to perform back-
propagation. We find that having mini-batch sizes much larger than what is usually considered best
practice is beneficial for our massively parallel use case. We use mini-batches of tens of thousands
of samples and observe that it stabilizes the learning process without increasing the total training
time.

2.2.2    Reset Handling
During training, the robots must be reset whenever they fall, and also after some time to keep them
exploring new trajectories and terrains. The PPO algorithm includes a critic predicting an infinite
horizon sum of future discounted rewards. Resets break this infinite horizon assumption and can
lead to inferior critic performance if not handled carefully. Resets based on failure or reaching a
goal are not a problem because the critic can predict them. However, a reset based on a time out can
not be predicted (we do not provide episode time in the observations). The solution is to distinguish


                                                   3
              (a)                      (b)                        (c)                         (d)
Figure 2: Terrain types used for training and testing in simulation. (a) Randomly rough terrain with
variations of 0.1 m. (b) Sloped terrain with an inclination of 25 deg. (c) Stairs with a width of 0.3 m
and height of 0.2 m. (d) Randomized, discrete obstacles with heights of up to ±0.2 m.
the two termination modes and augment the reward with the expected infinite sum of discounted
future rewards in a time-out case. In other words, we bootstrap the target of the critic with its
own prediction. This solution has been discussed in [24], but interestingly, this distinction is not
part of the widely used Gym environment interface [25] and is ignored by popular implementations
such as Stable-Baselines [26]1 . After investigating multiple implementations, we conclude that this
important detail is often avoided by assuming that the environments either never time out or only on
the very last step of a batch collection. In our case, with few robot steps per batch, we can not make
such an assumption since a meaningful episode length covers the collection of many batches. We
modify the standard Gym interface to detect time-outs and implement the bootstrapping solution. In
supplementary material, we show the effect of this solution on the total reward as well as the critic
loss.

3         Task Description
A quadruped robot must learn to walk across challenging terrain, including uneven surfaces, slopes,
stairs, and obstacles, while following base-heading and linear-velocity commands. We conduct
most of the simulation and real-world deployment experiments on the ANYbotics ANYmal C robot.
However, in simulation, we demonstrate the broader applicability of the approach by additionally
training policies for ANYmal B, ANYmal C with an attached arm, and the Unitree A1 robots.

3.1       Game-Inspired Curriculum

The terrains are selected to be representative of real-world environments. We create five types of
procedurally generated terrains presented in Fig. 2: flat, sloped, randomly rough, discrete obstacles,
and stairs. The terrains are tiled squares with 8m sides. The robots start at the center of the terrain
and are given randomized heading and velocity commands (kept constant for the duration of an
episode) pushing them to walk across the terrain. Slopes and stairs are organized in pyramids to
allow traversability in all directions.
Previous works have shown the benefits of using an automated curriculum of task difficulty to learn
complex locomotion policies [28, 29, 16]. Similarly, we find that it is essential to first train the pol-
icy on less challenging terrain before progressively increasing the complexity. We adopt a solution
inspired by [16], but replace the particle filter approach with a new game-inspired automatic curricu-
lum. All robots are assigned a terrain type and a level that represents the difficulty of that terrain. For
stairs and randomized obstacles, we gradually increase the step height from 5 cm to 20 cm. Sloped
terrain inclination is increased from 0 deg to 25 deg. If a robot manages to walk past the borders of
its terrain, its level is increased, and at the next reset, it will start on more difficult terrain. However,
if at the end of an episode it moved by less than half of the distance required by its target velocity,
its level is reduced again. Robots solving the highest level are looped back to a randomly selected
level to increase the diversity and avoid catastrophic forgetting. This approach has the advantage of
training the robots at a level of difficulty tailored to their performance without requiring any external
tuning. It adapts the difficulty level for each terrain type individually and provides us with visual
and quantitative feedback on the progress of the training. When the robots have reached the final
level and are evenly spread across all terrains due to looping back, we can conclude they have fully
learned to solve the task.
      1
    The Spinning-up [27] implementation of PPO uses the same bootstrapping solution by keeping track of
episode lengths within the algorithm, thus circumventing the limitation of the Gym interface.


                                                     4
Figure 3: 4000 robots progressing through the terrains with automatic curriculum, after 500 (top)
and 1000 (bottom) policy updates. The robots start the training session on the first row (closest to
the camera) and progressively reach harder terrains.
The proposed curriculum structure is well suited for the massively parallel regime. With thousands
of robots we can directly use their current progress in the curriculum as the distribution of the
policy’s performance, and do not need learn it with a generator network [30]. Furthermore, our
method doesn’t require tuning and is straightforward to implement in a parallel manner with near-
zero processing cost. We remove the computational overhead of re-sampling and re-generating new
terrains needed for the particle filter approach.
Fig. 3 shows robots progressing through the terrains at two different stages of the training process.
On complex terrain types, the robots require more training iterations to reach the highest levels. The
distribution of robots after 500 iterations shows that while the policy is able to cross sloped terrains
and to go down stairs, climbing stairs and traversing obstacles requires more training iterations.
However, after 1000 iterations, the robots have reached the most challenging level for all terrain
types and are spread across the map. We train for a total for 1500 iterations to let the policy converge
to its highest performance.

3.2   Observations, Actions, and Rewards

The policy receives proprioceptive measurements of the robot as well as terrain information around
the robot’s base. The observations are composed of: base linear and angular velocities, measurement
of the gravity vector, joint positions and velocities, the previous actions selected by the policy,
and finally, 108 measurements of the terrain sampled from a grid around the robot’s base. Each
measurement is the distance from the terrain surface to the robot’s base height.
The total reward is a weighted sum of nine terms, detailed in supplementary material. The main
terms encourage the robot to follow the commanded velocities while avoiding undesired base ve-
locities along other axes. In order to create a smoother, more natural motion, we also penalize joint
torques, joint accelerations, joint target changes, and collisions. Contacts with the knees, shanks or
between the feet and a vertical surface are considered collisions, while contacts with the base are
considered crashes and lead to resets. Finally, we add an additional reward term encouraging the
robot to take longer steps, which results in a more visually appealing behavior. We train a single
policy with the same rewards for all terrains.
The actions are interpreted as desired joint positions sent to the motors. There, a PD controller
produces motor torques. In contrast to other works [16, 20], neither the reward function nor the
action space has any gait-dependent elements.

3.3   Sim-to-Real Additions

In order to make the trained policies amenable for sim-to-real transfer, we randomize the friction
of the ground, add noise to the observations and randomly push the robots during the episode to


                                                   5
teach them a more stable stance. Each robot has a friction coefficient sampled uniformly in [0.5,
1.25]. The pushes happen every 10 s. The robots’ base is accelerated up to ±1 m/s in both x and
y directions. The amount of noise is based on real data measured on the robot and is detailed in
supplementary material.
The ANYmal robot uses series elastic actuators with fairly complex dynamics, which are hard to
model in simulation. For this reason and following the methodology of previous work [1], we use a
neural network to compute torques from joint position commands. However, we simplify the inputs
of the model. Instead of concatenating past measurements at fixed time steps and sending all of that
information to a standard feed-forward network, we only provide the current measurements to an
LSTM network. A potential drawback of this set-up is that the policy does not have the temporal
information of the actuators as in previous work. We have experimented with various ways of
providing that information through memory mechanisms for the policy but found that it does not
improve the final performance.

4     Results
4.1   Effects of Massive Parallelism

In this section, we study the effects of the number of parallel robots on the final performance of
the policy. In order to use the total reward as a single representative metric, we have to remove the
curriculum, otherwise a more performant policy sees its task difficulty increase and consequently a
decrease in the total reward. As such, we simplify the task by reducing the maximum step size of
stairs and obstacles and directly train robots on the full range of difficulties.
We begin by setting a baseline with nrobots = 20000 and nsteps = 50, resulting in a batch size of
1M samples. Using this very large batch size results in the best policy but at the cost of a relatively
long training time.
We then conduct experiments in which we increase the number of robots while keeping the batch
size constant. As a result, the number of steps each robot takes per policy update decreases. In this
case, the training time decreases with a higher number of robots, but the policy performance drops
if that number is too high. We start from 128 robots corresponding to the level of parallelization
of previous CPU implementations and increase that number up to 16384, which is close to the
maximum amount of robots we could simulate on rough terrain with Isaac Gym running on a single
workstation GPU.
In Fig. 4, we compare these results with the baseline, which allows us to select the most favorable
trade-off between policy performance and training time. We see two interesting effects at play.
First, when the number of robots is too high, the performance drops sharply, which can be explained
by the time horizon of each robot becoming too small. As expected, with larger batch sizes, the
overall reward is higher, and the time horizon effect is shifted, meaning that we can use more robots
before seeing the drop. On the other hand, below a certain threshold, we see a slow decrease in




                (a)                               (b)                               (c)
Figure 4: (a) Average and standard deviation (over 5 runs) of the total reward of an episode after
1500 policy updates for different number of robots and 3 different batch sizes. The ideal case of a
batch size of 1M samples with 20000 robots is shown in red. (b) Total training time for the same
experiments. (c) Reward dependency on total training time. Colors represent the number of robots,
while shapes show the batch size (circles: 49152, crosses: 98304, triangles: 196608). Points in the
upper left part of the graph (highlighted in green) represent the most desirable configuration.
                                                  6
                            (a)                                            (b)
Figure 5: Success rate of the tested policy on increasing terrain complexities. Robots start in the
center of the terrain and are given a forward velocity command of 0.75 m/s, and a side velocity
command randomized within [−0.1, 0.1] m/s. (a) Success rate for climbing stairs, descending stairs
and traversing discrete obstacles. (b) Success rate for climbing and descending sloped terrains.




             Figure 6: ANYmal C with a fixed arm, ANYmal B, A1 and Cassie in simulation.
performance with fewer robots. We believe this is explained by the fact that the samples are very
similar with many steps per robot because of the relatively small time steps between them. This
means that for the same amount of samples, there is less diversity in the data. In other words, with a
low number of robots, we are further from the standard assumption that the samples are independent
and identically distributed, which seems to have a noticeable effect on the training process. In terms
of training time, we see a nearly linear scaling up to 4000 robots, after which simulation throughput
gains slow down. As such, we can conclude that increasing the number of robots is beneficial for
both final performance and training time, but there is an upper limit on this number after which an
on-policy algorithm cannot learn effectively. Increasing the batch size to values much larger than
what is typically used in similar works seems highly beneficial. Unfortunately, it also scales the
training time so it is a trade-off that must be balanced. From the third plot we can conclude that
using 2048 to 4096 robots with a batch size of ≈ 100k or ≈ 200k provides the best trade-off for this
specific task.

4.2       Simulation

For our simulation and deployment experiments, we use a policy trained with 4096 robots and a
batch size of 98304, which we train for 1500 policy updates in under 20 minutes2 . We begin by
measuring the performance of our trained policy in simulation. To that end, we perform robustness
and traversability tests. For each terrain type, we command the robots to traverse the representative
difficulty of the terrain at high forward velocity and measure the success rate. A success is defined
as managing to cross the terrain while avoiding any contacts on the robot’s base. Fig. 5 shows
the results for the different terrains. For stairs, we see a nearly 100 % success rate for steps up to
0.2 m, which is the hardest stair difficulty we train on and close to the kinematic limits of our robot.
Randomized obstacles seem to be more demanding, with the success rate decreasing steadily. We
must note that in this case, the largest step is double the reported height since neighboring obstacles
can have positive and negative heights. In the case of slopes, we can observe that after 25 deg the
robots are not able to climb anymore but still learn to slide down with a moderate success rate.
Given our relatively simple rewards and action space, the policy is free to adopt any gait and behav-
ior. Interestingly, it always converges to a trotting gait, but there are often artifacts in the behavior,
such as a dragging leg or unreasonably high or low base heights. After tuning of the reward weights,
we can obtain a policy that respects all our constraints and can be transferred to the physical robot.
To verify the generalizability of the approach, we train policies for multiple robots with the same
set-up. We use the ANYmal C robot with a fixed robotic arm, which adds about 20 % of additional
      2
    Trained on: i9-11900k CPU, NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. VRAM requirements are in the supplementary
material.


                                                    7
       Figure 7: Locomotion policy, trained in under 20min, deployed on the physical robot.
weight, and the ANYmal B robot, which has comparable dimensions but modified kinematic and
dynamic properties. In these two cases, we can retrain a policy without any modifications to the
rewards or algorithm hyper-parameters and obtain a very similar performance. Next, we use the
Unitree A1 robot, which has smaller dimensions, four times lower weight, and a different leg con-
figuration. In this case, we remove the actuator model of the ANYdrive motors, reduce PD gains
and the torque penalties, and change the default joint configurations. We can train a dynamic policy
that learns to solve the same terrains even with the reduced size of the robot. Finally, we apply our
approach to Agility Robotics’ bipedal robot Cassie. We find that an additional reward encouraging
standing on a single foot is necessary to achieve a walking gait. With this addition, we are able
to train the robot on the same terrains as its quadrupedal counterparts. Fig. 6 shows the different
robots.

4.3   Sim-to-real Transfer

On the physical robot, our policy is fixed. We compute the observations from the robot’s sensors,
feed them to the policy, and directly send the produced actions as target joint positions to the mo-
tors. We do not apply any additional filtering or constraint satisfaction checks. The terrain height
measurements are queried from an elevation map that the robot is building from Lidar scans.
Unfortunately, this height map is far from perfect, which results in a decrease in robustness between
simulation and reality. We observe that these issues mainly occur at high velocities and therefore
reduce the maximum linear velocity commands to 0.6 m/s for policies deployed on the hardware.
The robot can walk up and down stairs and handles obstacles in a dynamic manner. We show samples
of these experiments in Fig. 7 and in the supplementary video. To overcome issues with imperfect
terrain mapping or state estimation drift, the authors of [19] implemented a teacher-student set-up,
which provided outstanding robustness even in adverse conditions. As part of future work, we plan
to merge the two approaches.

5     Conclusion
In this work, we demonstrated that a complex real-world robotics task can be trained in minutes with
an on-policy deep reinforcement learning algorithm. Using an end-to-end GPU pipeline with thou-
sands of robots simulated in parallel, combined with our proposed curriculum structure, we showed
that the training time can be reduced by multiple orders of magnitude compared to previous work.
We discussed multiple modifications to the learning algorithm and the standard hyper-parameters
required to use the massively parallel regime effectively. Using our fast training pipeline, we per-
formed many training runs, simplified the set-up, and kept only essential components. We showed
that the task can be solved using simple observation and action spaces as well as relatively straight-
forward rewards without encouraging particular gaits or providing motion primitives.
The purpose of this work is not to obtain the absolute best-performing policy with the highest ro-
bustness. For that use case, many other techniques can be incorporated into the pipeline. We aim
to show that a policy can be trained in record time with our set-up while still being usable on the
real hardware. We wish to shift other researchers’ perspective on the required training time for a
real-world application, and hope that our work can serve as a reference for future research. We ex-
pect many other tasks to benefit from the massively parallel regime. By reducing the training time
of these future robotic tasks, we can greatly accelerate the developments in this field.




                                                  8
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Mayank Mittal, Joonho Lee, Takahiro Miki, and Peter Werner for their
valuable suggestions and help with hardware experiments as well as the Isaac Gym and PhysX
teams for their continuous support.

References
 [1] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter. Learn-
     ing agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots. Science Robotics, 4(26), 2019.
 [2] S. Gu, E. Holly, T. Lillicrap, and S. Levine. Deep reinforcement learning for robotic manip-
     ulation with asynchronous off-policy updates. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics
     and Automation (ICRA), May 2017.
 [3] G. Kahn, A. Villaflor, B. Ding, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Self-supervised deep reinforcement
     learning with generalized computation graphs for robot navigation. In IEEE International
     Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2018.
 [4] OpenAI, I. Akkaya, M. Andrychowicz, M. Chociej, M. Litwin, B. McGrew, A. Petron,
     A. Paino, M. Plappert, G. Powell, R. Ribas, J. Schneider, N. Tezak, J. Tworek, P. Welinder,
     L. Weng, Q. Yuan, W. Zaremba, and L. Zhang. Solving rubik’s cube with a robot hand, 2019.
 [5] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In
     IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012.
 [6] E. Coumans and Y. Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games, robotics
     and machine learning. http://pybullet.org, 2016–2021.
 [7] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, and M. Hutter. Per-contact iteration method for solving contact dynamics.
     IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 3(2), 2018. URL www.raisim.com.
 [8] V. Makoviychuk, L. Wawrzyniak, Y. Guo, M. Lu, K. Storey, M. Macklin, D. Hoeller, N. Rudin,
     A. Allshire, A. Handa, and G. State. Isaac gym: High performance GPU based physics simu-
     lation for robot learning. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
     Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021.
 [9] N. Heess, D. TB, S. Sriram, J. Lemmon, J. Merel, G. Wayne, Y. Tassa, T. Erez, Z. Wang,
     S. M. A. Eslami, M. A. Riedmiller, and D. Silver. Emergence of locomotion behaviours in rich
     environments. CoRR, abs/1707.02286, 2017.
[10] A. Stooke and P. Abbeel. Accelerated methods for deep reinforcement learning. CoRR,
     abs/1803.02811, 2018.
[11] B. Shacklett, E. Wijmans, A. Petrenko, M. Savva, D. Batra, V. Koltun, and K. Fatahalian. Large
     batch simulation for deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
     Representations (ICLR), 2021.
[12] J. Liang, V. Makoviychuk, A. Handa, N. Chentanez, M. Macklin, and D. Fox. Gpu-accelerated
     robotic simulation for distributed reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning
     (CoRL), 2018.
[13] C. D. Freeman, E. Frey, A. Raichuk, S. Girgin, I. Mordatch, and O. Bachem. Brax - a differ-
     entiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation. In 35th Conference on Neural
     Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2021.
[14] A. Bouman, M. F. Ginting, N. Alatur, M. Palieri, D. D. Fan, T. Touma, T. Pailevanian, S.-
     K. Kim, K. Otsu, J. Burdick, and A.-a. Agha-Mohammadi. Autonomous spot: Long-range
     autonomous exploration of extreme environments with legged locomotion. In IEEE/RSJ Inter-
     national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2020.
[15] C. Gehring, P. Fankhauser, L. Isler, R. Diethelm, S. Bachmann, M. Potz, L. Gerstenberg, and
     M. Hutter. Anymal in the field: Solving industrial inspection of an offshore hvdc platform with
     a quadrupedal robot. In Field and Service Robotics, 2021.


                                                 9
[16] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter. Learning quadrupedal locomo-
     tion over challenging terrain. Science Robotics, 5(47), 2020.

[17] V. Tsounis, M. Alge, J. Lee, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter. Deepgait: Planning and control of
     quadrupedal gaits using deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
     PP, 03 2020.

[18] S. Gangapurwala, M. Geisert, R. Orsolino, M. Fallon, and I. Havoutis. Real-time trajectory
     adaptation for quadrupedal locomotion using deep reinforcement learning. In IEEE Interna-
     tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2021.

[19] T. Miki, J. Lee, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter. Wild anymal: Robust zero-shot
     perceptive locomotion. Submitted to Science Robotics, 2021.

[20] J. Siekmann, K. Green, J. Warila, A. Fern, and J. W. Hurst. Blind bipedal stair traversal via
     sim-to-real reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2105.08328, 2021.

[21] C. Gregg and K. Hazelwood. Where is the data? why you cannot debate cpu vs. gpu per-
     formance without the answer. In IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis of
     Systems and Software (ISPASS), 2011.

[22] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
     algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017.

[23] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel. High-dimensional continuous
     control using generalized advantage estimation. In Proceedings of the International Confer-
     ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

[24] F. Pardo, A. Tavakoli, V. Levdik, and P. Kormushev. Time limits in reinforcement learning.
     CoRR, abs/1712.00378, 2017.

[25] G. Brockman, V. Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman, J. Tang, and W. Zaremba.
     Openai gym, 2016.

[26] A. Hill, A. Raffin, M. Ernestus, A. Gleave, A. Kanervisto, R. Traore, P. Dhariwal, C. Hesse,
     O. Klimov, A. Nichol, M. Plappert, A. Radford, J. Schulman, S. Sidor, and Y. Wu. Stable
     baselines. https://github.com/hill-a/stable-baselines, 2018.

[27] J. Achiam. Spinning up in deep reinforcement learning, 2018. URL https://spinningup.
     openai.com/en/latest/.

[28] R. Wang, J. Lehman, J. Clune, and K. O. Stanley. Paired open-ended trailblazer (POET): end-
     lessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning environments and their solutions.
     CoRR, abs/1901.01753, 2019.

[29] Z. Xie, H. Y. Ling, N. H. Kim, and M. van de Panne. Allsteps: Curriculum-driven learn-
     ing of stepping stone skills. Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH / Eurographics Symposium on
     Computer Animation, 2020.

[30] C. Florensa, D. Held, X. Geng, and P. Abbeel. Automatic goal generation for reinforcement
     learning agents. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning
     (ICML), volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2018.


                                               10
A     Appendix




                         (a)                                              (b)
Figure 8: (a) Computational time of an environment step. (b) Total time for a learning iteration with
a batch size of B = 98304 samples.

A.1     Simulation Throughput Analysis

In Fig. 8, we show the computational time of each part of an environment step, as well as the total
times required for a learning iteration for different numbers of robots. In Fig. 8 (a) we observe that
the simulation is the most time consuming step and its time slowly increases with the number of
robots. The time spent on the computation of observations and rewards is the second slowest step
and also slowly increases with the number of robots, while inference of the policy and the actuator
network are computed in nearly constant time. Fig. 8 (b) shows the total time required to collect
a fixed number of samples and perform the policy update. Increasing the number of parallel robots
decreases the total time of all sub parts except the learning step which is independent on the number
of robots. In Fig. 9 we examine the GPU VRAM required to train different number of robots
both with and without graphical rendering. We see that 9 Gb are required to run 4096 robots with
rendering enabled. Without a graphical output, 6 Gb are sufficient. On flat terrain these numbers are
reduced to 7 Gb and 5 Gb respectively.
In Sec. A.1.1 and Sec. A.1.2 we describe additional techniques that we use to optimize the simula-
tion throughput.

A.1.1    Time Step

The simulation time step needs to be maximized to get the maximum throughput. For each policy
step, which we run at 50 Hz, we need to perform multiple actuator and simulator steps to obtain
a stable simulation. Since these added steps directly scale the amount of computation, we aim to
reduce them as much as possible. We find that we can not use a time step smaller than 0.005 s which
corresponds to four simulation steps per policy step. This limit is imposed by the actuator network
(approximating a discrete-time PD-controller) becoming unstable and not by the simulation itself.




                   (a) Flat Terrain                                (b) Rough Terrain
Figure 9: GPU VRAM usage for different number of robots during training with a batch size of
B = 98304 samples on flat and rough terrains.
                                                 11
A.1.2    Contact Handling


A large part of the simulator’s computational time is spent on contact detection and handling. Reduc-
ing the number of potential contact pairs increases simulation throughput. We optimize the model
of the robot to keep only the necessary collision bodies: feet, shanks, knees, and the base.
The resolution of the terrain plays an important role in contact optimization. A height field is a very
common type of terrain representation, in which heights are defined on a uniform grid. However
one of its unfortunate properties is that it is impossible to get vertical surfaces. In order to get a
steep slope approximating a vertical step, we need high resolution, which degrades the simulation
performance. Instead, we convert a low-resolution height field to a triangle mesh and correct the
vertical surfaces.
Finally, in PhysX (Isaac Gym’s physics engine), even though contacts between the different robots
are ignored, they are still detected. As such, the placement of robots in the terrain influences the
computational load. Spreading the robots further apart from each other is highly beneficial. In the
curriculum presented here, we need to place many robots close together at the beginning of training,
but they quickly disperse as the training progresses. Additionally, once the robots learn to avoid
crashes, there are fewer contacts with the base and knees and fewer costly resets. We see a factor of
two difference in simulation time between the first minutes and the end of the training.




A.2     Effect of Time-out Bootstrapping


We analyze the effects of bootstrapping the reward at timeouts as described in Sec. 2.2.2 by com-
paring the total reward and the critic loss with and without the particular handling of timeouts.
Fig. 10 shows the results for both flat and rough terrain tasks. We see that the critic loss is higher
without bootstrapping, and correspondingly, the total reward is lower. Even though learning can be
successful without this addition, it greatly reduces the critic loss and improves the total reward by
approximately 10 % to 20 % for both tasks.




                                            (a) Flat Terrain




                                           (b) Rough Terrain
Figure 10: Comparison of total reward and critic loss, when training with and without reward boot-
strapping on time-outs.
                                                  12
A.3   Reward Terms



                                              Joint positions qj
                                             Joint velocities q˙j
                                         Joint accelerations q¨j
                                       Target joint positions q¨∗j
                                                Joint torques τj
                                        Base linear velocity vb
                                       Base angular velocity ωb
                             Commanded base linear velocity vb∗
                            Commanded base angular velocity ωb∗
                                       Number of collisions nc
                                                Feet air time tair
                                      Environment time step dt
                               Table 1: Definition of symbols.




                                                    definition          weight
                                                    ∗
                   Linear velocity tracking     φ(vb,xy   − vb,xy )     1dt
                                                      ∗
                  Angular velocity tracking      φ(ωb,z   − ωb,z )      0.5dt
                                                          2
                    Linear velocity penalty            −vb,z            4dt
                  Angular velocity penalty         −||ωb,xy ||2         0.05dt
                              Joint motion     −||q¨j ||2 − ||q˙j ||2   0.001dt
                              Joint torques          −||τj ||2          0.00002dt
                                Action rate          −||q˙∗j ||2        0.25dt
                                 Collisions        −ncollision          0.001dt
                                               P4
                              Feet air time      f =0 (tair,f − 0.5)    2dt

                                                              2
Table 2: Definition of reward terms, with φ(x) := exp(− ||x||
                                                         0.25 ). The z axis is aligned with gravity.




A.4   PPO Hyper-Parameters



                                         Batch size     98304 (4096x24)
                                     Mini-bach size     24576 (4096x6)
                                 Number of epochs       5
                                         Clip range     0.2
                                 Entropy coefficient    0.01
                                    Discount factor     0.99
                               GAE discount factor      0.95
                         Desired KL-divergence kl∗      0.01
                                    Learning rate α     adaptive∗

Table 3: PPO hyper-parameters used for the training of the tested policy. (*) Similarly to [9], we
use an adaptive learning rate based on the KL-divergence, the corresponding algorithm is described
in Alg. 1




                                                13
Algorithm 1 Adaptive learning rate computation.
  kl ← KL(πnew , πold )
  if kl > 2kl∗ then
     α ← max(10−5 , α/1.5)
  else
     if kl < 0.5kl∗ then
        α ← min(10−2 , 1.5α)
     end if
  end if


A.5   Noise Level in Observations

                                        Joint positions     ±0.01 rad
                                       Joint velocities     ±1.5 rad/s
                                  Base linear velocity      ±0.01 m/s
                                Base angular velocity       ±0.2 rad/s
                                     Projected gravity      ±0.05 rad/s2
                        Commanded base linear velocity      0 m/s
                       Commanded base angular velocity      0 rad/s
                             Measured terrain heights       ±0.1 m

Table 4: Noise scale for the different components of the observations. For each element, the noise
value is sampled from a uniform distribution with the given scale and added to the observations.




                                               14
